Add tutorial for basic ua commands (SC-1056) (#2092)
canonical/ubuntu-advantage-client: docs/tutorials/basic_ua_commands.md

# Tutorial: cover base UA commands

The Ubuntu Advantage (UA) Tools provides users with a simple mechanism to
view, enable, and disable offerings from Canonical on their system. On this tutorial
we will cover the base UA commands that allow an user to successfully manage the offering
on their machine.

## Prerequisites

On this tutorial, we will use [LXD](https://linuxcontainers.org/lxd/) containers.

> To set LXD on your computer, please follow this [guide](https://linuxcontainers.org/lxd/getting-started-cli/).

Author: I think it is `set up LXD`, but let's @orndorffgrant make the call here haha

> To set LXD on your computer, please follow this [guide](https://linuxcontainers.org/lxd/getting-started-cli/).

Reviewer: `set up LXD` makes the most sense to me :+1:

## Base UA commands

### Status

The status command of UA allows you to see the status of any UA service on your machine.
It also easily allows you to verify if your machine is attached to an UA subscription
or not.

Let's run it on the LXD container:

```console
$ ua status
```

It is expected for you to see an output similar to this one:

```
SERVICE       AVAILABLE  DESCRIPTION
cis           yes        Center for Internet Security Audit Tools
esm-infra     yes        UA Infra: Extended Security Maintenance (ESM)
fips          yes        NIST-certified core packages
fips-updates  yes        NIST-certified core packages with priority security updates
livepatch     yes        Canonical Livepatch service

This machine is not attached to a UA subscription.
See https://ubuntu.com/advantage
```

You can see that the status command shows the service that are available for that given machine,
while also presenting a short description for each of them.

Additionally, if we look at the last lines of the output, we can identify that this machine is not
attached to an UA subscription.
```
This machine is not attached to a UA subscription.
See https://ubuntu.com/advantage
```

### Attach

> To access any of those service offerings, the user need to attach UA to a subscription. This is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To access any of those service offerings, the user needs to attach UA to a subscription. This is
```
or, as we are being informal,
```suggestion
To access any of those service offerings, the you need to attach UA to a subscription. This is
```

> achieved by running the attach command. Before we run it, we need to get ourselver a token.

Reviewer 3: Minor change - ourselves.

esm-infra     yes       enabled   UA Infra: Extended Security Maintenance (ESM)
fips          yes       n/a       NIST-certified core packages
fips-updates  yes       n/a       NIST-certified core packages with priority security updates
livepatch     yes       n/a       Canonical Livepatch service

NOTICES
Operation in progress: ua attach

Enable services with: ua enable <service>

                Account: USER ACCOUNT
           Subscription: USER SUBSCRIPTION
            Valid until: 9999-12-31 00:00:00+00:00
Technical support level: essential
```

From this output, we can see that the attach command enables all of the services specified by the user subscription.
After the command ends, we display what is the state of the machine now.
That status output is exactly what you will see if you run the status command again.
We can confirm this by running:

```console
$ ua status
```

One question that may arise is that the output of status and unattached are different. When
attached, status presents two new columns, **ENTITLED** and **STATUS**, while also dropping the
**AVAILABLE** column. For more information of why the output is different, please refer to this

> [explanation](../explanations/status_columns.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[explanation](../explanations/status_columns.md).
```

Finally, another useful bit at the end of both attach and status is the contract expiration date:

```
    Account: USER ACCOUNT
Subscription: USER SUBSCRIPTION
Valid until: 9999-12-31 00:00:00+00:00
```

> The `Valid until` field describe when your contract will be expired, so you can be aware of when it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Valid until` field describes when your contract will be expired, so you can be aware of when it
```

needs to be renewed.

### Refresh

In the last section, we mentioned that your contract can expire. After we renew the contract
how can we make our machine aware of that ? We can do this through this command:

```console
$ sudo ua refresh
```

> This command will refresh the contract on your machine. This command is also really useful if you

Reviewer 3: Could we add the fact that `ua refresh` also updates the config esp. since `ua refresh --help` says that 
```sh
`ua refresh` is the equivalent of `ua refresh config && ua refresh contract`.
```

Author: That's a good point. I have not added more context about refresh here because I have not discussed in the tutorial about the config file or even MOTD messages. I think we can add a note at the end saying that refresh perform more actions on the machine and link this into an explanation doc. What do you all think ? @CalvoM @renanrodrigo @orndorffgrant

Reviewer 2: just a text line here would do imho, mentioning it will also update UA configuration. When we have a Config tutorial, we can add a link here pointing to it.

Author: Okay, I will put another doc explaining what refresh does in the system and then I will reflect it on this section

want to change any definitions on your subscription. For example, let's assume that you now want
`cis` to be enabled by default when attaching. After you modify your subscription for that, running
the refresh command will process any changes that were performed in the subscription, enabling
`cis` because of this.

### Enable

There is another way to enable a service that wasn't activated during attach or refresh.
Suppose that you don't want to modify your subscription, but still want to enable `cis`
on the machine. To achieve that, We can use the enable command.

Let's enable `cis` on our LXD container by running:

```console
$ sudo ua enable cis
```

> After running it. you should see an output similar to this one:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After running it you should see an output similar to this one:
```

```

> ne moment, checking your subscription first

Reviewer 3: Really minor change, `One moment`

fips-updates  yes       n/a       NIST-certified core packages with priority security updates
livepatch     yes       n/a       Canonical Livepatch service
```

We can see that `cis` status is back to disabled.

```
Note: the disable command doesn't uninstall any package that was installed by
the service. The command only removes the access you have to the service, but it
doesn't undo any configuration that was applied on the machine.
```

### Detach

Finally, what if I don't want to be attached to an UA subscription any longer ?
We can achieve that through the `detach` command:

```console
$ sudo ua detach
```

This command will disable all of the UA services on the machine for you and
get rid of the subscription stored on your machine during attach.

```
Note: the detach command will also not uninstall any packages that were installed by
any service enabled through UA.
```

### Final thoughts

This tutorial has covered the 6 main commands of UA. If you need more advanced options to configure
the tool, please take a look on [How to guides](./docs/howtoguides). If that still doesn't cover
your needs, feel free to reach the UA team on `#ubuntu-server` on Libera IRC.

> Before we finish this tutorial, let's just delete our LXD container by running:

Reviewer 2: Maybe it is useful to tell the user to run this on the machine, and not inside of the container where the previous commands were executed.

# Tutorial: cover base UA commands

> The Ubuntu Advantage (UA) Tools provides users with a simple mechanism to

Author: The rationale here for tools is that the package is called `ubuntu-advantage-tools`, so that's why I named it like this. But we can change it to Client in the docs if we all agree

> The Ubuntu Advantage (UA) Tools provides users with a simple mechanism to

Reviewer: We refer to it as client pretty much everywhere except for the package name I think so far haha :upside_down_face:

> view, enable, and disable offerings from Canonical on their system. On this tutorial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
view, enable, and disable offerings from Canonical on their system. In this tutorial
```

> we will cover the base UA commands that allow an user to successfully manage the offering

Author: TIL, thanks @orndorffgrant

## Creating the Xenial LXD container

To test all of those commands, let's create a Xenial LXD container. Remember to set up LXD as
mentioned on the [Prerequisites](#prerequisites) section. After that, just run the command:

```console
$ lxc launch ubuntu-daily:xenial dev-x
```

After running that, let's access the container by running:

```console
$ lxc shell dev-x
```

## Base UA commands

### Status

The status command of UA allows you to see the status of any UA service on your machine.
It also easily allows you to verify if your machine is attached to an UA subscription
or not.

Let's run it on the LXD container:

```console
$ ua status
```

It is expected for you to see an output similar to this one:

```
SERVICE       AVAILABLE  DESCRIPTION
cis           yes        Center for Internet Security Audit Tools
esm-infra     yes        UA Infra: Extended Security Maintenance (ESM)
fips          yes        NIST-certified core packages
fips-updates  yes        NIST-certified core packages with priority security updates
livepatch     yes        Canonical Livepatch service

This machine is not attached to a UA subscription.
See https://ubuntu.com/advantage
```

> You can see that the status command shows the service that are available for that given machine,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see that the status command shows the services that are available for that given machine,
```

while also presenting a short description for each of them.

Additionally, if you look at the last lines of the output, you can identify that this machine is not
attached to an UA subscription.
```
This machine is not attached to a UA subscription.
See https://ubuntu.com/advantage
```

### Attach

> To access any of those service offerings, you need to attach UA to a subscription. This is

Reviewer: I suggest either
```suggestion
To access any of those service offerings, you need to attach `ua` to a subscription. This is
```
or
```suggestion
To access any of those service offerings, you need to attach to a UA subscription. This is
```

Author: Going with the second one

You will log in with your SSO credentials, the same credentials you use for https://login.ubuntu.com.
After getting your UA token, go to the LXD container and run:

```console
$ sudo ua attach YOUR_TOKEN
```

It is expected for you to see an output similar to this one:

```
Enabling default service esm-infra
Updating package lists
UA Infra: ESM enabled
This machine is now attached to 'USER ACCOUNT'

SERVICE       ENTITLED  STATUS    DESCRIPTION
cis           yes       disabled  Center for Internet Security Audit Tools
esm-infra     yes       enabled   UA Infra: Extended Security Maintenance (ESM)
fips          yes       n/a       NIST-certified core packages
fips-updates  yes       n/a       NIST-certified core packages with priority security updates
livepatch     yes       n/a       Canonical Livepatch service

NOTICES
Operation in progress: ua attach

Enable services with: ua enable <service>

                Account: USER ACCOUNT
           Subscription: USER SUBSCRIPTION
            Valid until: 9999-12-31 00:00:00+00:00
Technical support level: essential
```

From this output, you can see that the attach command enables all of the services specified by the user subscription.

> After the command ends, UA display what is the state of the machine now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the command ends, `ua` displays the new state of the machine.
```

That status output is exactly what you will see if you run the status command again.
You can confirm this by running:

```console
$ ua status
```

> One question that may arise is that the output of status and unattached are different. When

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One question that may arise is that the output of `ua status` while attached is different from the output of `ua status` when unattached. When
```

attached, status presents two new columns, **ENTITLED** and **STATUS**, while also dropping the
**AVAILABLE** column. For more information of why the output is different, please refer to this
[explanation](../explanations/status_columns.md).

Finally, another useful bit at the end of both attach and status is the contract expiration date:

```
    Account: USER ACCOUNT
Subscription: USER SUBSCRIPTION
Valid until: 9999-12-31 00:00:00+00:00
```

The `Valid until` field describes when your contract will be expired, so you can be aware of when it
needs to be renewed.

### Refresh

In the last section, we mentioned that your contract can expire. After you renew the contract

> how can you make our machine aware of that ? You can do this through this command:

Reviewer: We should include some assurance here that free tokens do not expire.

We can say something like "While free tokens never expire, if you buy a UA subscription, and later need to renew the contract, you can make your machine aware of it by running this command."

Author: Modified it a little bit, but I agree it is information worth having on the tutorial

```console
$ sudo ua refresh
```

This command will refresh the contract on your machine. This command is also really useful if you
want to change any definitions on your subscription. For example, let's assume that you now want
`cis` to be enabled by default when attaching. After you modify your subscription for that, running
the refresh command will process any changes that were performed in the subscription, enabling
`cis` because of this.

### Enable

There is another way to enable a service that wasn't activated during attach or refresh.

> Suppose that you don't want to modify your subscription, but still want to enable `cis`
> on the machine. To achieve that, You can use the enable command.

Reviewer: Simplification suggestion :shrug: 
```suggestion
Suppose that you want to enable `cis` on this machine manually. To achieve that, You can use the enable command.
```

```console
$ sudo ua enable cis
```

After running it, you should see an output similar to this one:

```
One moment, checking your subscription first
Updating package lists
Installing CIS Audit packages
CIS Audit enabled
Visit https://security-certs.docs.ubuntu.com/en/cis to learn how to use CIS
```

You can confirm that `cis` is enabled now by running:

```console
$ ua status
```

And you should see:
```
SERVICE       ENTITLED  STATUS    DESCRIPTION
cis           yes       enabled   Center for Internet Security Audit Tools
esm-infra     yes       enabled   UA Infra: Extended Security Maintenance (ESM)
fips          yes       n/a       NIST-certified core packages
fips-updates  yes       n/a       NIST-certified core packages with priority security updates
livepatch     yes       n/a       Canonical Livepatch service
```

You can see now that `cis` is marked as `enabled` on status.

### Disable

Let's suppose that you don't want a service anymore, you can also disable any service offering
through UA. For example, let's disable the `cis` service you just enabled by running on the LXD
container:

```console
$ sudo ua disable cis
```

> After running that command, let's now run status to see what happened to `cis`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After running that command, let's now run `ua status` to see what happened to `cis`:
```

```
SERVICE       ENTITLED  STATUS    DESCRIPTION
cis           yes       disabled  Center for Internet Security Audit Tools
esm-apps      yes       enabled   UA Apps: Extended Security Maintenance (ESM)
esm-infra     yes       enabled   UA Infra: Extended Security Maintenance (ESM)
fips          yes       n/a       NIST-certified core packages
fips-updates  yes       n/a       NIST-certified core packages with priority security updates
livepatch     yes       n/a       Canonical Livepatch service
```

You can see that `cis` status is back to disabled.

> ```
> Note: the disable command doesn't uninstall any package that was installed by
> the service. The command only removes the access you have to the service, but it
> doesn't undo any configuration that was applied on the machine.
> ```

Reviewer: Suggest blockquotes for notes like these
```suggestion
> Note: the disable command doesn't uninstall any package that was installed by
> the service. The command only removes the access you have to the service, but it
> doesn't undo any configuration that was applied on the machine.
```

### Detach

> Finally, what if I don't want to be attached to an UA subscription any longer ?
> You can achieve that through the `detach` command:

Reviewer: I haven't paid close enough attention to this, but we should stick with one "subject" throughout the tutorial. In other words, we should pick one of "I", "We", or "You" and use it consistently. I think we've mostly been using "We", so lets keep that going here.

Also some minor things

```suggestion
Finally, what if we don't want this machine to be attached to a UA subscription any longer?
We can achieve that using the `detach` command:
```

Author: That's a good point. I am trying to use `you` in this doc. The places were I am using `we` are places were I mentioning that the UA team will perform an action. But let me know if  ẁe` is better instead of `you` on the docs

Reviewer: I somehow didn't see @renanrodrigo's comment that says pretty much the exact same thing :facepalm: 

I think `you` is good too. And `we` would make sense in those situation :+1:

```console
$ sudo ua detach
```

This command will disable all of the UA services on the machine for you and
get rid of the subscription stored on your machine during attach.

```
Note: the detach command will also not uninstall any packages that were installed by
any service enabled through UA.

> ```

Reviewer: I suggest blockquote here as well

### Final thoughts

This tutorial has covered the 6 main commands of UA. If you need more advanced options to configure

> the tool, please take a look on [How to guides](./docs/howtoguides). If that still doesn't cover

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the tool, please take a look in [How to guides](./docs/howtoguides). If that still doesn't cover
```
